when you had been trained as an artillery officer?
Well, communications was a major part of training
of any artillery officer because the artillery
cannot function without good communications.
Actually, we were very proud of the fact that many
times the entire division depended on artillery
communications for a commanding general to be
able to communicate with his troops. So there's a
lot of emphasis on wire and radio for any artillery
officer's training. I had kind of an aptitude for
that,
and some love of it. So for instance, as a
reconnaissance officer, that's a major
responsibility, being able to communicate
working with wire and radio. So it wasn't a
neurological assignment at all. and I served then
as communication officer and commander of
headquarters battery until after we'd been in
combat for 30 days and then I was moved into the fire
direction center.
That was the second time I'd been assigned as
assistant
S3 operations officer.
So in other words, then you were the assistant
commander? No, not assistant commander,
assistant operations officer. That's a fire
direction officer. The person that does that has a
job running the fire direction center.
Usually a person that does that has to be fairly
good in mathematics because it's pretty much a
mathematical exercise.
I like that. How did you like your first command?
Well, there were mixed emotions about that.
Headquarters battery commander is not a good
command job because while you're commander, On
the headquarters staff, you have to take care of
all of the officers that rank higher than you do.
And most of the men in a headquarters battery are
assigned to a section commanded by an officer that
outranks the headquarters battery commander. So
it's not the best command job there is. Still, I
like the command job. and was able to get along with
the higher ranking officers. And how many men did
you have under your control? Oh, I think
headquarters battery had about 120 men in those
days. And as far as headquarters battery is
concerned, what you do is, well explain exactly.
The tactical job, it was combined with
communication officers. So the tactical
responsibility of the headquarters battery
commander was communications. And the
administrative responsibility was, of course,
supplies, rations,
command of the troops, taking care of the
administrative matters related to the troops
that manned the different sections of the
headquarters.
How were you doing on D-Day? I was sitting off the
coast of Normandy in a Liberty ship. I was there in
the greatest spectacle in the world, I guess.
There were ships as far as you could see in any
direction, most of them flying barrage balloons.
There was still the firing from our warships, our
destroyers against shore batteries off Omaha
Beach. There were the landing parties going in.
There was the overhead cover during the daylight
hours from the American and British aircraft.
At dusk, You could look in one direction and see
airplanes returning to England and the other
direction see the German planes coming in, dive
bombers, that sort of thing. They dominated the
scene at night. And the British and American
planes dominated the daylight hours.
But it was one more spectacle.
And how many men did you have on your Liberty ship?
Well, there were two batteries on there, so
there'd be about 250 men. And you were waiting to go
ashore after the second wave then? That's right.
First the infantry, and then you? Well, the first
two divisions were assault troops. These were the
1st and 9th Division of the 5th Corps, and the 2nd
Division was follow-up troops. So the 2nd
Division landed on B-plus-1 infantry artillery,
went between the 1st and 9th Divisions and
attacked to the south. And at that time, the 1st and
9th Divisions had won the battle of resistance of
the troops were stationed in that area, there
wasn't really anything much between us and Berlin
of any great organized bases. So our initial,
initially we had no resistance, but very soon the
Germans threw in reinforcements, attacked us
from the flank, We got strung out about nine miles
beyond the 1st and 9th Divisions, so pretty well
along the flanks. Our 38th Infantry Regiment took
very heavy casualties, and we had to pull back and
consolidate positions from the dominant
terrain, which was a hill 192 meters high. It's
called Hill 192 that's overlooking St. Louis. So
we pulled back and consolidated positions, held
in that position for six weeks while the supplies
caught up and built up for a further attack. Are you
under Bradley then? Yes, we were under Bradley,
who later of course was given an army group. He was
Corps Commander at that time as I recall.
Patton was building up for the breakout troops, of
course, after the Battle of St. Louis.
Patton took his armored divisions and made the
famous raids on down into southern France and
bottled up German troops into some of the seaport
areas and ran wild for a while after he broke
through the primary resistance right there.
But we sat in one position for six weeks after we got
in there and pulled back while there was a build up
of supplies and additional troops. We were about
nine miles in from the beach. In other words, you
went in on D plus one then? D plus one. Did you feel
that you were part of a great historical
event? I suppose so. Our troops had been training
for this for a long time. We were ready to engage in
combat. We were confident, professional
soldiers at that time.
That didn't mean we weren't scared, you know. We
weren't insane when we got into shelling and
bombings and all. We suffered fear, of course, but
discipline has to overcome that to accomplish
your mission. What did you think of your
commanding officer and the way that the unit was
run, the quality of the officers in charge?
Well, we had a West Point Lieutenant Colonel
commanding the battalion at that time. He wasn't
anything too great. The executive officer was an
ROTC graduate from Oklahoma State University
named Alvin Mullenro.
I can't even remember the name of the West Point
officer that commanded it, but
he was wounded. in the breakout up on this hill 192
where we had such a hell of a fight to get it back
after we first had it with no resistance whatever
and evacuated. Why'd you evacuate this strategic
location? They were taken back to England. They
were taken to the beach and through medical
evacuation taken back to England. trips that were
faring, ships that were faring troops over.
So
we didn't think that is a general officer corps,
we're not
extremely respectful of that commander.
Al Mudrow was, I'd have to say, some improvement.
It could be that, of course, nearly all of us in the
battalion by that time had gotten commissions
through ROTC, and I guess we were glad to see one of
the ROTC graduates get in command.
Oh, he was a commander of the battalion for the rest
of the 279 days that I was in combat. I still see him
occasionally. He's moved from Oklahoma to
Brownfield, Texas out west of Lubbock, and is a
large farmer out there. We respected him.
How can you continue the war after the hill and did
you continue your sweep eastward? Well at Hill
192, we had one heck of a fight getting that back. It
was highly fortified. We were looking forward to
getting that as an observation post to continue
the attack, but when we did finally take it, very
ironical that it provided very good observation
all the way back to Omaha Beach, but the
observation to the south and east wasn't any good
at all. It was too heavily wooded on those slopes,
so it really wasn't. We had to rely on our light
aviation for observation more. Then we got
diverted All the way down, they sent three
divisions down to try to take the port of Brest in
southern France. And this was, the Allies needed a
seaport. When was this? Oh gosh, I don't know. It
must have been about August. I think that was about
eight weeks after we landed.
six weeks and right after Patton broke through he
you know went around all down in southern France
and just bottled up and bypassed German troops and
assembled in several seaports along the way which
was of course very good strategy for them because
these seaports had great tactical importance at
that time we were loading off loading all supplies
just from temporary port facilities So we needed a
major C4. I believe the high command believed that
if we had a big show of force at Brest that the
Germans would surrender.
But we got down there and got into a hell of a fight.
Very ironical that the only allied troops down
around Brest when we got there with a whole corps,
three divisions, was one tank destroyer
battalion. That's all there were, didn't they?
Allied troops.
Well, instead of surrendering, the Germans were,
we found out later, were under direct orders from
Hitler to hold out till the death. So we got in a
tremendous fight and fought hard for a month
before we took Brest. And after Brest fell, it was
not useful, never was used Germans did a fantastic
job of demolition of all the port facilities. They
used it and then destroyed it. That's right. You
know they had vast submarine pans, reinforced
concrete 15 feet thick or some fantastic amount
that was really bomb proof. Had railroad tunnels
around where they were absolutely invulnerable
to artillery fire and all. very difficult to take
this interior city of Brest.
And the... Fairly high casualties. The artillery
had a tremendous amount to do because rather than
frontal attacks on the fortress Brest, interior
Brest, tremendous amount of artillery fire and
bombing were used. To sort of polarize them into
submission? Right, but finally there was finally
there was street by street fighting to finally
take breast and you know you couldn't go down the
streets at all because the streets were commanded
by German machine gun and artillery fire all the
way down the streets. So the infantry developed a
new tactic They used satchel charges to just blow
holes through the walls of buildings, one
building after another. What kind of charges?
Satchel charges. These are charges that are made
up in like a little satchel that a person would use.
And they'd be put against the wall and lighted with
a fuse. And they are concentrated charges that
blow a hole in a wall. So the engineer troops did
that. so the infantry could progress down the
interior of the blocks and didn't have to get
exposed out on the streets.
So after Brest fell- Were there many German
prisoners? I believe that the prisoners were
55,000 taken out of there, so they had a tremendous
number of troops in the fortress of Brest. A lot of
them were support troops and that's where we found
out they had a good many women. Men as old as 70 years
old that were serving in the German army. That
early? That old. But I mean that early in the war I
knew that Hitler committed a number of elderly
people and a number of very young people, but I was
under the opinion that that was like January of 45
and and they had 70 year old men. They were Germans
or were they French? They were German, but they
were doing the support bit, the finance, the
quartermaster, the support. But you were
surprised to see those people? We were surprised,
but still they had enough fanatical SS troops
around to make any of that kind of people fight.
Because they were more afraid of their own troops
than they were of us. Once they got committed to
front lines, there's no question that the
fanatical troops of the Germans kept them
fighting. Were you part then of taking the
prisoners of war, or did you watch them march out,
or how did that work? Not directly. Our artillery
would be a little bit further down. Of course we
watched them march out, sure, but as far as being
directly involved, our artillery battalion of
general support nature was not that close. Where
were you? Were you a couple of miles behind the
infantry troops? Yes. In a sacred location? Yes,
of course always the artillery headquarters
would be stationed beyond small arms fire front
lines. Of course now we don't talk very much about
front lines, but in those days they were front
lines fairly well established. So they, we would
tend to try to get the headquarters far enough back
to avoid vulnerability from small arms fire or
mortar fire. So usually they were a couple of miles
at least. And you wanted to be close enough so you
could be called in. Well, with a forward movement,
of course you want to be stationed as far forward as
you can to avoid having to displace any more than
you have to.
We actually kept our headquarters in the same
location for the whole month because we were
within range of anywhere in that whole Brest city
complex from the one position we occupied.
It was the strangest thing in the world that after
Brest fell we were 800 miles from the front lines.
We turned on the lights.
It's just like being in the communication zone
rather than in the combat zone. We was far away. So
our next displacement was 800 miles clearing to
Germany.
And when was that? Was that before the Battle of the
Bulge? Oh, sure. It was well before the Battle of
the Bulge. So it would have been in October,
November, I'd say. Or 44. Probably late October
because I believe we were at Lausfeld, Germany.
And we were occupying the positions which we
occupied for about six weeks and were later
displaced by the 106th Division. Moved directly
from Boston and replaced us position for position
when we were pulled out. and put into an attack on
the Rohrer River dams. Can you tell me about that?
Well, we had a very thin position in the Snee Eifel,
the snow mountain area of Germany, considered to
be an unlikely attack spot. We were occupying
27,000 square miles, I mean 27,000 yards of front.
way overextended for an infantry division.
Some of, a lot of the territory was covered just by
patrols, not any troops stationed in it at all. And
that's where the Germans hit on the Battle of the
Bulge. We had just two or three days before, had
been pulled out and committed on an attack on the
Rohwer River dams to try to prevent the Germans
from blowing those up and flooding the Rohwer
River. So in the Battle of the Bulge, the 106th
Division that replaced us was captured almost
intact. It hit right through the positions where
we were. It's very strange that Some of the
activities we had observed and reported back,
there seemed to be a lot of digging of potatoes and
that sort of thing that we'd observed from our
observation posts. We know now, of course, and
knew later, is Germans were removing their
minefields and getting ready to attack. There was
a stretch of very bad weather, you see, during that
covered the German massing of troops in their
attack. I always wonder whether a seasoned
division like us would have been able to hold them
because there was only one or two main roads coming
into our whole division area, whether with
artillery fire and with experienced resistance,
whether we'd have been able to hold the attack
right there. Kind of like to believe that we could
have, but anyhow, The first we knew about it is that
the first troops of our division that felt the
attack was a quartermaster company of our
division, so they came in and hit our division
right in the rear, absolutely.
Our people at our airfield for our little Leber
Cousins plane woke up one morning with the German
tanks overlooking the field. But it's very
strange that the German tanks were committed
without very much infantry. And all of our
aviation personnel were able to walk away from
there without any of them getting captured.
Because the Germans didn't have infantry along
with their tanks. Is this because they were
probably short of manpower? I think they probably
were. But anyway, our
particular artillery battalion turned the guns
180 degrees around. So we were attacking and so the
threat was clear in the rear of the battalion. And
our howitzers were turned around 180 degrees and
they were registered by the division artillery S3
looking out of his third-story window in a
building because the German troops got within
one-half mile of our division headquarters, our
division artillery headquarters, so our pouches
were turned around. You must have been under
intense fire then, weren't you? No, we really
weren't. The Germans never knew that that's where
the division headquarters were. They could
easily have taken division headquarters or
division artillery at that time, but we did not
feel any of their fire at all. They just passed you
and just kept moving? That's right. You were sort
of a pocket within their advance? Actually our
division
was on, as I recall, the northern side of the
breakthrough area. We're mighty proud of the fact
that they never widened the breakthrough area at
all. Our division was attacked by five different
German divisions as they would hit our division,
but then displaced to the west. So they displaced,
gosh, I guess 100 miles to the west. but they never
widened that area, so they never got but one real
main supply route. So when the weather cleared, of
course our Air Force really took care of their
supply trains and all the vehicles they had along
that main supply route.
And we think that we were part of the reason for
that. Our division got reinforced by a tank
battalion that had been on rest leave somewhere,
was put right into a tank destroyer battalion, not
tank battalion. We had a tank destroyer battalion
attached to our fire direction center. Our
ammunition train, going back to the ammunition
dump, captured some German parachute troops.
They had a parachute troop landing in support of
this, but the high winds scattered them out and
they never were able to assemble and become an
effective fighting force. So they hit in our rear
area, but never created as much havoc. The biggest
threat we had during this time was German soldiers
in American uniforms using American vehicles. So
this was a threat. and all the confusion and
everything. And of course they soon learned the
sign and countersign that we had where we'd
challenge people. With American ingenuity, they
started asking them things like, who won the World
Series? Things like that that any American
soldier would know, but the Germans wouldn't
know. the way some of them, of course many of them
spoke just as good English as our troops. That was a
big threat, all right, posing as American
soldiers, being German soldiers.
During this battle, our artillery, we darn near
wore out our howitzers, and we really had a lot of
artillery fire, and of course Just before
daylight every day, we would mass fire on all of the
most logical assembly points. Of course,
artillery was a mighty big factor in this. Then
again, our experience- Especially before the
weather cleared. Yeah, and our experienced
infantry troops in these little towns with the
narrow streets were able to be in the basement of
these towns. And as I remember, one of our infantry
regiments, knocked out 68 German tanks just going
down the streets of narrow town because they they
could do it with bazooka fire with uh with satchel
charges that sort of thing because of course a tank
without infantry support the tankers are pretty
blind and if you're in the basement of buildings on
narrow streets where you sure have good shots of
tanks but
one of our Infantry regiments really took care of a
lot of those tanks just by themselves.
I'd say that was the most glorious contribution
that the 2nd Infantry Division made in all of World
War II, right there in the Battle of the Bulge. Of
course that was mid-December of 1944. Were you and
your colleagues pretty surprised about the
German attack? Did you think that the Germans were
fairly well beat? No, I don't think we had a very
good perception of that. We didn't know that much
about the big picture.
The Germans we'd been up against all along the way
were damn good fighters, so we had tremendous
respect for them. What do you mean they were
excellent fighters? In what way? Well, they were
well trained. The individual soldiers were well
disciplined, well trained, and many of them just
absolutely fanatical.
They were skillful, had pretty darn good
equipment.
Their 88 and their machine pistols were
tremendous weapons. We had a lot of respect for
them, sure.
We were very surprised about the attack through
that particular area, because we'd been
occupying those spots for a long time, and there'd
been almost no activity, so it was considered to be
a very quiet area of the front, an unlikely area for
any kind of attack. So I'd have to say that the
German tactics in using that were superb.